For almost 40 years,
Moses enjoyed a life of comfort and privilege
as the adopted son of Pharaoh’s daughter.
Among the advantages were material prosperity
and advanced education.
How might those advantages
have affected Moses’ outlook?
We gain some insight
from an incident that took place
when Moses was 80 years of age.
It’s recorded in Exodus chapter 5.
There, in a conversation with the Pharaoh,
the Pharaoh is reported
to have said to Moses:
“Who is Jehovah,
that I should obey his voice . . . ?
I do not know Jehovah at all.”
No truer words have ever been spoken
that Pharaoh did not know Jehovah
and, as a result, had no faith in him.
He was faithless.
His haughty words,
dismissive of Jehovah,
no doubt reflected the Egyptian belief
that the Pharaoh was himself a god.
Was Moses’ outlook
affected in a negative way
by that Egyptian culture?
No.
We see a refreshing contrast.
Moses was a humble man,
a man of faith who, at the age of 40,
made a decision that reflected
the depth of that faith
and that changed his life forever.
Now, why should you and I
be interested in Moses’ example of faith?
Because like Moses,
we face situations that require choices
—decisions that reflect
the quality of our faith.
For example, note how an elder
faces a test of his faith
in the following dramatization.
Danny is going to look after the business
while we’re away.
I only scheduled a few small jobs.
I’m sure he can handle it.
It’s our assigned convention,
and I planned as best I could
for us to go together.
But some things
you just can’t see coming.
Hello.
Danny was in a panic.
He got trouble calls
from my two biggest accounts.
It was bad.
I can’t lose their business.
For just a few minutes,
let’s consider what the Scriptures
have to say about Moses’ faith
and consider four ways
that we can imitate him.
Turn, please, to Hebrews chapter 11,
and we’re going to begin reading in verse 24
—Hebrews 11:24:
“By faith Moses, when grown up,
“refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh’s daughter,
“choosing to be
mistreated with the people of God
rather than to have
the temporary enjoyment of sin.”
So the first thing that Moses did?
He rejected the proud,
selfish thinking of that Egyptian world.
He chose to be mistreated
with the Israelites who were slaves
rather than to align himself with a culture
that dismissed Jehovah.
What prompted that decision?
The opening words of verse 24 tell us
that Moses was a man of faith,
and his faith shaped his decisions
—not his culture, not community pressure—
his faith.
And that’s our second point.
Now let’s continue reading in verse 26:
“Because he considered
the reproach of the Christ
“to be riches greater
than the treasures of Egypt,
for he looked intently
toward the payment of the reward.”
Moses received an assignment,
a commission, from Jehovah,
and he viewed
that commission as more valuable
than anything that Egypt had to offer.
He turned his back on the comforts of Egypt
and aligned himself with Jehovah
and the outworking of Jehovah’s purpose.
Our third point:
He had clear spiritual vision.
“He looked intently
toward the payment of the reward.”
Moses could see outside the “Egypt box,”
and he could see the fulfillment
of Jehovah’s wonderful promises
to Abraham and Abraham’s descendants.
The spiritual vision
is commented on further in verse 27:
“By faith he left Egypt,
“but not fearing the anger of the king,
“for he continued steadfast
as seeing the One who is invisible.”
Yes, Moses could see the Pharaoh,
but with his clear spiritual vision,
he could see Jehovah.
Moses had an unbreakable friendship
with Jehovah,
and so can you.
The quality of any friendship can be measured
by the quality of communication
that characterizes it.
Regular heartfelt prayer
and meaningful study of the Bible
constitute two-way communication
between an individual and Jehovah.
As we get to know Jehovah better and better
and as our faith strengthens and deepens,
then our decisions reflect that faith.
And in our words and actions,
we give evidence of that faith.
And that brings us to the fourth point:
In the opening words of verse 27:
“By faith [Moses] left Egypt.”
His faith was of such quality
that it was evidenced
in his words and his actions.
True, Moses was a man of action
—he left Egypt.
But he was also a man
who expressed his convictions.
When Moses and the Israelites
stood on the shore of the Red Sea
with Pharaoh
and his armies behind them
and the Red Sea in front of them
and seemingly nowhere to go,
how did Moses strengthen the people?
“Do not be afraid.
Stand [still] and see
the salvation of Jehovah.”
Those words must have
strengthened the Israelites.
In a similar way,
we can strengthen those around us,
whether in the preaching work, in our
dealings with our family, or with others.
When our faith is voiced
and evidenced
in the things that we say and do,
we’re a blessing to those around us.
Of course, it’s important
that we stay humble as Moses did
—ever receptive
to Jehovah’s direction and counsel
that he provides
through his Word and his organization.
Now, how about that elder who we met earlier.
Let’s look in and see how he imitates Moses
in making a decision.
OK, just find the parts,
and I’ll call you back.
This will take all weekend.
You want us to go?
Will you get the program later?
Yeah, and I’ll have to text John
that I can’t be an attendant.
But what will I miss that I can’t get later?
At Hebrews 11:26 it says
Moses “considered the reproach of the Christ
“to be riches greater
than the treasure of Egypt,
for he looked intently
toward the payment of the reward.”
Of what value is being a prince of Egypt
compared with being . . .
Honey?
Honey, what do you think?
Danny?
Yeah.
Here’s what I want you to do for now,
and we’ll pick up the pieces when I get back.
Did you notice how the elder
made a decision based on his faith?
With his eyes of faith,
he could see the blessings
that he and his family would enjoy
if they attended the convention together,
and he made a decision as a spiritual man.
In a similar way, if we imitate Moses
by rejecting the proud,
selfish thinking of the world
and allowing our decisions
to be shaped by our faith
and not by culture or community pressure,
if we maintain clear spiritual vision,
and if our faith is evidenced
in our words and actions,
then we can be confident of Jehovah’s support
and his hand of salvation in our behalf,
just as he did for Moses.
Brother Robert Ciranko,
a helper to the Writing Committee,
will consider
the final talk of this symposium,
“Imitate the Faithful, Not the Faithless
—Jesus’ Disciples, Not the Pharisees.”